This is the Camberwell Submarine.
It is not really a submarine, it is a heat boiler and exhaust for most houses here,
but it is the closest I can find to a 'submarine' to which I have access.
So here, I would like to tell you something about something you may not have known.
which is 'the letter of the last resort'.
The United Kingdom has four Trident-Class Nuclear 'submarines'.
They are our most important nuclear deterrent.
We are one of the few countries that have Nuclear Capability. The thing with nuclear war is,
is that it is monumental stupid. It involves the death of everyone involved,
and inexplicably many deaths from civilians. So the thing is ...
if you were the Prime Minister, and you knew that missiles would be launched to the United Kingdom
and you have four minutes to respond - as was possible during the 80's.
What would you do?
Are you launching them? Send you your own response,
knowing that the only thing it yields, knowing that it can not stop the incoming missiles,
the only thing that delivers it is killing more innocent civilians.
Do you launch them, do you take a vengeful blow that you have always threatened with? Or...
do you accept that all this you can do at this point is kill more people and not launch them?
And more important...
What if the Prime Minister is already dead?
What if the sub-commander is already dead?
What if the attack has already hit, and nothing has gone to the British Nuclear 'submarines'?
Different armies around the world have different ways to deal with this, and the British way of dealing with it
is just ... almost a Poetic way of doing it.
In every British 'submarine', in a safe,
in another safe, is one of the four letters, all identical and handwritten by the Prime Minister.
And every Prime Minister who comes to power now, even David Cameron,
one of their first tasks is to sit down and write these letters by hand.
who say to the commander of every Nuclear 'submarine', if everything went wrong, if Great Britain is destroyed,
if the minister president is dead, if everyone in the chain of command is dead, and you can not do anything else ...
... are you launching?
And if ade 'submarine' moves on and finds that Great Britain is destroyed
and one of the tests they use is whether Radio 4 is still broadcasting ...
apparently ...
they look in the safe.
They open the envelope, they look at the letter, and they tell them
countless people have to kill as a last resort.
or that they go to the nearest friendly port, and do what they can to rebuild.
And that is the case with nuclear war, once it starts, the situation is no longer predictable.
You can give up so well, because the idea was never to launch ...
... it was always to be scared.
And that is something you may not have known.